1.1 What this Policy is all about
This policy is an embodiment of the salient rules and procedures that are an imperative to be
followed in order to enable BDRCS to maintain and manage knowledgeable, capacitated and
efficient members of governance, management, support staff and other workforce (project based
staff, RCYs and volunteers). This policy document is principally guided by the Seven
Fundamental Principles of Red Cross and Red Crescent movement as an overarching framework
and will henceforth be called the BDRCS HR Policy 2011. This will be a set of binding rules
applicable to all employees of BDRCS.
The importance of the HR Policy as a guiding document for BDRCS and its critical role in
shaping the organization into an effective and strong National Society were envisioned in the
Strategic Plan 2011- 2015 document of the organization.
Ideally, this policy document owes substantially to the Strategy 2020. Like the BDRCS Strategic
Plan 2011-2015, this document also reflects the basic guiding principles of the Strategy 2020. As
BDRCS Strategic Plan 2011-2015 envisioned ‘capacitating the society, doing more, and reaching
further’ to be its ultimate goal towards providing better services to the vulnerable people,
deriving from Federation Strategy 2020, the HR Policy Guideline for BDRCS also resembled
basics of Strategy 2020 via BDRCS Strategic Plan 2011-2015.
This HR Policy will come into force with immediate effect.
The rules and procedures outlined in the policy document take cognizance of the basic
requirements of the Bangladesh Labour Code, 2006 and are subject to future changes in line with
any changes brought to the Labour Code in the future.
1.2 Emergence and Legal Status of Bangladesh Red Crescent Society (BDRCS)
Following the victory in the liberation war on December 16, 1971, the erstwhile Red Cross
Society in East Pakistan was transformed into the National Red Cross Society of Bangladesh on
December 20, 1971 which was renamed as Bangladesh Red Cross Society by a GoB order on
January 4, 1972. The President of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh recognized BDRCS as a
Voluntary Aid Society, auxiliary to the public authorities with retrospective effect from
December 16, 1971 by issuing the President’s Order No. 26 of 1973 in accordance with the
Geneva Convention of 1949. Later, the society was renamed as Bangladesh Red Crescent Society by the Act No. XXV of 04 April 1988. The International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) recognized BDRCS as a part of the Movement on September 20, 1973. The International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC), the erstwhile League of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies admitted BDRCS membership on November 02, 1973. The emblem
of the society was also changed accordingly. BDRCS operates in line with the seven
Fundamental Principles of the global Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement to undertake
humanitarian work and serve the vulnerable people.
1.3 Present Governance Structure
According to the order number 6 of the President’s Order No. 26 of 1973, ‘The President of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh shall be the President of the Society’. The General Body and
the Managing Board are regarded to be the two highest policy making bodies of the organization.
The Managing Board consisting of the Chairman, the Vice-Chairman and the Treasurer, and 12
other members to be elected by the General Body of the society acts as the governing body of the
organization (Article 9 (1) at page No. 3 of the President’s Order No. 26 of 1973). The General
Body is constituted of:
(i) two delegates nominated by the Executive Committee (EC) from among the EC members
of each Unit across the country,
(ii) Chairman, Vice-Chairmen and Treasurer of the society,
(iii) members of the Managing Board, and
(iv) one representative each from the Ministries of Health and Family Welfare, Social
Welfare, Women and Children Affairs, Food and Disaster Management and the Defense
Division (Article 8 at page No. 3 of the President’s Order No. 26 of 1973).
The Chairman of BDRCS is appointed by the President and the Vice-Chairman and the Treasurer
are elected by the General Body like the other 12 members (Article 10 (1) and 10 (2) at page No.
5 of the President’s Order No. 26 of 1973).
1.4 Methodology
An exhaustive review of previous BDRCS documents and reports having particular relevance to
the HR policy was made. Among many, “Transforming the Bangladesh Red Crescent Society”
Phase I and Phase II reports by Arthur D. Little, “Bangladesh Red Crescent Society Standing
Orders” (Administrative and Service Rules) 1997, “Constitution of Bangladesh Red Crescent
Society, Final Draft by Joint ICRC/Federation Statute Commission”, “The Bangladesh Red
Crescent Society Order, 1973 (President’s Order No. 26 of 1973)”, and the “Standing Order”
(Administrative and Service Rules) 2005, were duly consulted. Also, as recommended by Arthur
D. Little in his Phase I report (Report Phase I, Executive Summary, Sub-title: Staff
Recruitment, Compensation, Training, Page S-5) the best practices of both the successful Bangladeshi organizations working in the development and humanitarian sectors as well as sister
Red Cross/Red Crescent Societies around the globe and more precisely in the region were
consulted.
1.5 Strategic Goal of the HR Policy Guideline
To evolve and strengthen BDRCS as a well functioning national society through improvement of
its management functions and governance roles with the introduction of appropriate policy
guidelines, rules and procedures and thus ensuring their implementation.
1.6 Strategic Objectives of the HR Policy Guideline
(a) Making optimum utilization of BDRCS human resource potentials aimed at
strengthening its management functions as well as broadening management capacity of
the society to respond to the ongoing as well as the changing situation of the disaster
pattern, vulnerability scenario and climate change perspectives.
(b) Streamlining Governance roles to proactively help aiding BDRCS to grow as a well
functioning national society through accelerating the unhindered growth of its 68 Units
and expanded activities of RCY, Bangladesh.
1.7 Scope of the HR Policy Guideline
The scope of this HR Policy document extends to the BDRCS management, support staff,
workforce (volunteers), and life, annual and institutional members recruited at the Unit levels. It
is also mentionable that although not directly, BDRCS Governance also falls within the scope of
the document as it has a lateral link with the Management to ensure:
 Accountability in the (i) Operational and Programmatic management, as well as (ii) Staff
management, and
 Organizational growth and functions of the Units at the district and city corporation level
and (ii) RCYs/volunteers.
1.8 Functional Definitions
Unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or in the content:
a. BDRCS or Society means the Bangladesh Red Crescent Society.
b. Governance: Governance means the highest policy making entity of the Bangladesh Red
Crescent Society (BDRCS), which includes: (i) Managing Board and (ii) General Body
of the society. The Managing Board shall give policy directives, procedures and
guidelines for overall management and smooth functioning of the Society’s activities.
Annual budget, audit report, annual report and projects/programs shall be approved in the
annual general meeting by the General Body of the society. The Chairman of the Society shall preside over all the Board meetings, while the Secretary General (SG) of the Society
shall act as the Secretary to the Board (Bangladesh Red Crescent Society: Standing
Orders (Administration and Service Rules, Article 1.2 Management, Page 4).
c. Management: Management means the key functionaries at the headquarters including,
Secretary General (SG), Deputy Secretary General (DSG), senior staff members like,
Division/Department/Program chiefs and all other relevant officers including Engineer
and Medical Officers from different Divisions/Departments/Programs at headquarters and
Unit level officers at the district and city corporations.
d. Defining a Division: To define the role of a Division in the organizational structure of
BDRCS, it is better to differentiate a division with a department first. The scope of a
division is much wider than the scope of a department. The role of a Divisional Director
is to maintain coordination with functions of all the Departments, projects and programs
under the respective divisions. Other responsibilities of a Division include: providing
guidance to the activities of all Departments under its jurisdiction, monitor and supervise
the activities of the individual departments, and if necessary, provide necessary advice.
The Divisional Director is directly reportable to the Secretary General.
e. Defining a Department: Department comes next to Division in the organizational
structure of BDRCS. A department concentrates in its day-to-day planned functions. This
will also act as the link with field based program activities under the department. The
Director or Deputy Director in position is directly reportable to the Divisional Director.
f. Senior Management Committee: The Senior Management Committee means a small
committee framed with senior personnel (members of staff) of various levels and sections
of BDRCS management. The body shall be comprised of the Secretary General (SG), the
Deputy Secretary General (DSG) and the Heads of other Divisions who take decisions for
management planning and implementation. The SG shall be the Chief Operating Officer
of the Society and he shall be the official spokesperson of the Society with regard to
dealing with press, mass media and other organizations. The Deputy Secretary General
shall assist the SG in the implementation of the day-to-day management functions. He
shall also hold charge of one Division and act as the Secretary General in the absence of
the SG (Bangladesh Red Crescent Society: Standing Orders (Administration and
Service Rules, Article 1.2 Management, Page 4). The committee shall assist the SG in
case of staff recruitment, replacement, promotion, salary fixation, particularly for
project/contractual positions as well as for temporary appointments, and removal
retrenchment, staff welfare affairs etc.
g. Support Staff: ‘Support Staff’ shall come to mean all staff members under different
Divisions, Departments, Programs encompassing headquarters to Unit levels, who
provide support services to operate BDRCS. The support staff includes mali, cook, aya, cleaner, peon, messenger, night guard, driver, midwife, nurse, paramedic, lady health
visitor, matron, laboratory technician, mechanic, mechanic’s helper, telephone operator,
Telex operator, computer operator and those who perform various clerical jobs.
h. Workforce: The workforce refers to BDRCS’s huge human resource namely the
volunteers, either project based, such as volunteers of Cyclone Preparedness Program
(CPP) or Red Crescent Youths (RCYs), Bangladesh. The RCYs are the backbone of
BDRCS. They shall be recruited at school, college, University, and Unit (Upazila)/
branch (City Corporation and district) levels and at the national headquarters. The highest
age limit of the RCY shall be 30 years. Experienced RCY, Bangladesh members who
cross 30 years of age but are willing to continue with the movement, can be involved as
Senior RCYs until they cross 40 years of their age (Youth Red Crescent Policy, BDRCS,
Article 2.3, 2.4 & 3, Page 3).
i. Life Member: The life members refer to the adult Bangladeshi citizens who become
BDRCS’s members for life contributing a specific amount of money, as determined by
the society, to their respective Units. They must keep up their belief in and respect to Red
Cross and Red Crescent movement and the Seven Fundamental Principles. They shall
have voting right to elect the Executive Committee of the Unit.
j. Annual Member: The annual members refer to the adult Bangladeshi citizens who get
BDRCS’s membership contributing a specific amount of money, as determined by the
society, to their respective Unit for one year period. This membership shall be annually
renewable and the members eligible for voting right to elect Executive Committee of the
Unit.
k. Institutional member: The Heads of the commercial or industrial establishments within
the jurisdiction of a Unit may apply for institutional membership by contributing a
specific amount of money, as determined by the society, for one year period. If approved,
this membership shall be annually renewable and the members eligible for voting right to
elect Executive Committee of the Unit.
l. Appointing Authority: This refers to a Senior Management person, (such as Secretary
General), authorized by the Chairmen of BDRCS who operates the process of
recruitment, hiring and employment to any position, except Deputy Secretary General, be
it regular/permanent, project based/contractual or temporary.
m. ‘Employee/staff’ means an appointee or incumbent to a position of the Society, whether
probationary or permanent/regular, project or contractual or temporary whose conditions
of employment are stipulated in his/her contract of appointment.
n. ‘Salary’ means the amount of money, inclusive of the basic pay in the time scale of pay
for the position along with the benefits and allowances, paid monthly or periodically to an employee as the pay and allowances, which has been sanctioned for the position held
by him/her.
o. ‘Basic Pay’ means the amount of pay in the time scale of pay assigned to a particular
position corresponding to a designated grade of the organization, excluding benefits and
allowances, which has been sanctioned for a position held by an employee.
p. ‘Allowance’ means payment made to an employee in addition to their Basic Pay.
Allowance may also mean the amount paid in `Salary’ minus `basic pay’ that may
contain the summed amount from the housing, medical, conveyance, children or
telephone allowances.
q. ‘Duty’ includes the period of active service of an employee whether on probation,
temporary, permanent/regular or on contract.
r. ‘Service’ includes the period during which an employee is on duty or on leave authorized
by competent authority but does not include any period during which an employee is
absent from duty or overstays his leave without permission, unless such period of absence
or overstay is regularized and approved by a written order by the authority.
s. ‘Officer’ means an officer of the society, whether permanent/regular, contractual or
temporary.
t. ‘Probation’ means period of temporary appointment at the beginning of a service during
which the employee is under-study before being confirmed or discontinued from service.
u. ‘Honorarium’ means a recurring or non-recurring payment granted to an employee or
person under contract as remuneration for special work of occasional nature required for
the organization.
v. ‘Special allowance’ means any payment which is specifically granted;
i. as remuneration for a special nature of work or for unique conditions,
ii. on account of any special expenditure to be incurred by an employee for an official
business required to achieve the organizational purpose.
w.. Sexual harassment is inappropriate, unwanted, and unwelcome conduct of a sexual
nature perceived as harassment by the subject of the conduct adversely impacting the
dignity of women and men inside the working environment and outside.
1.9 Enforcement and Amendment of the Document
Once approved by the BDRCS Managing Board, this document shall come into force with
immediate effect. However, to meet the needs of the time and the changed context, any of the provisions of the Rules contained in this document is subject to review for addition or change,
modification, amendment, and replacement over a reasonable period of time at the discretion of
BDRCS Managing Board.
1.10 Interpretation
The Senior Management Committee will provide necessary clarifications or interpretation, if any
issue has been left uncovered or provisions not made in this document for the best interest and
benefit of the organization and its personnel with due concurrence from the Managing Board of
the society